Live streaming again.
Great. Thank you.
All right, we will crack into it. Good afternoon everyone.
Good afternoon, ministers. Thank you very much
for joining us this afternoon for having a wonderful day
of scrutiny here on the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee, and look forward
to your contribution over the next hour
as we scrutinize the appropriations under our business side
and as they relate to New Zealand's greater enterprise.
So wonderful to have you along with us, Willis,
and capacity as Minister, economic growth, uh,
and also is paid an investment.
Thank you very much for being here.
We will hand over to you for some introductory comments,
and then I'm sure any questions for members? Great.
Thank you Mr. Chair, for the opportunity.
Um, I intend to make a couple of minutes remarks
before handing over to Minister McLay, who's obviously
the lead in this area,
although we are joint shareholding ministers when it comes
to NZTE, we are joined today by Carolyn, the head of ndi,
uh, as well as Peter Crisp, the head of NZTE.
Uh, and I know that their work is familiar to members
around the committee table.
And while we may have our political debates, I think we are
all shared in a perspective that, um,
getting our exporters into the best position possible so
that they can go out and win customers
and markets around the world is good
for New Zealand as a whole.
Um, as Minister for Economic Growth, uh, my mission is
to work with ministers across government to
identify those barriers that may be preventing our firms
and industries and sectors from maximizing their growth
possibilities, uh, in terms of job creation,
taking on new markets, taking on new investments.
It is also to work out
what enabling factors the government can accelerate to, um,
drive that growth further in that regard.
Earlier this year, we released the going for growth
document, which outlined 87 actions we have underway to, uh,
support growth in the economy, a critical pillar
of which is promoting global trade and investment.
And that is essentially NZ t's, um, major mission.
Um, it's, uh, a knowledge to the people around this table
that we are in the midst of an export led recovery.
Uh, it's no exaggeration, I don't think to say
that our exporters, in particular, our primary producers,
are driving economic growth back into this economy,
and we are very grateful for their efforts.
Um, I, I see NZ T's role, uh,
as twofold on, on the one hand, um,
they have been very instrumental in recent months
and responding to, uh, our exporters
who are seeking information
and assurance about what changes in tariffs globally mean
for them and how it may impact their market access.
Uh, NZTE, in addition to running seminars
and providing information to those who request it,
have worked closely with a focus group of
around a thousand exporters
with whom they have very close relationships.
That role of providing information and clarity to exporters
and providing fraudulent government is a really crucial
activity for NZTE.
The other, um, obviously very important role
that they play is supporting the government's ambitious
target to double the value
of New Zealand's exports in 10 years, from 95 billion
to 190 billion by 2034.
We know that businesses have the drive
and ambition needed to scale and grow internationally, uh,
but there are longstanding challenges which need
to be overcome in many cases for them
to realize those ambitions.
So NZTE plays a key role in helping our businesses
connect to the world.
Uh, they succeed, uh, both by taking part in trade missions
and connecting, uh, businesses to market opportunities,
providing them information
and supporting a range of growth initiatives,
including in the documents that they have provided to you.
Uh, hundreds of international growth outcomes, uh, dozens
of specific business deals that they have played a part in,
in bringing on, um, Mr.
McClay will detail for you further how we are now going
to have an invest New Zealand entity, whose role will be
to really focus how, on
how we can draw international capital to bear
and investing in businesses, uh, at home,
and providing an easier portal into New Zealand investment
for offshore investors who see prospects in our economy.
I'm gonna leave it there.
Um, but, but I would, I would just say that
I think it's known to New Zealanders
that international trade is critical to our success.
We're not gonna get rich selling for ourselves.
We need to sell to the world, um, in a time
of real uncertainty.
It's become fashionable to concentrate on all
of the things that have got harder.
Um, the story that I'm increasingly telling New Zealand
exporters is that when things are hard,
there is also opportunity.
And I have been heartened to hear stories including, uh,
from Silver Fern Farms more recently, that in the midst
of global instability, there are customers looking
for longer term contracts, higher value contracts, who look
to New Zealand as a certain reliable partner with whom
to trade in a world that is increasingly volatile.
So the role that NZTE can play in smoothing those
relationships, building those relationships is significant,
and we are very grateful for their work.
I'll hand over to you, minister cle.
Thank you so much, colleagues.
Uh, pleasure to be here
and, uh, to talk a bit about the work that NCT does,
but I'll broaden out slightly
because ultimately it's just about exports.
And I think everyone here knows we're an export nation.
I often joke, uh, when I'm overseas, that we had
to consume all of the food and fiber we produce.
We would be larger people for it,
and the world would be a, a worse off place
because of the very high quality of
what our farmers produce.
But trade is diversified.
It's not just the primary sector anymore.
That indeed it is about innovation and agri agritech,
but it's across the board from services
to other technologies.
Uh, actually, we now, with our trade agreements,
a significant network of trade agreements around the world.
Uh, Kiwis Punch, uh, well
above their weight New Zealand trade
and enterprise job is to assist them, not to export
for them, to help them, to help them export more, to do more
and markets, uh, uh, uh, where they are entering.
Uh, largely the very large companies fend
for themselves, rightly so.
So it's about where we can add value.
Uh, NZT over the last year, uh, supported
around 6,000 export companies, um,
helped about just over 1500 of those, uh, export deals, uh,
worth, uh, $3.8 billion.
So that's from a, a small amount of engagement helped
to very, very hands-on, depending upon the company.
International growth outcomes increased from two
and a half thousand to 2,700, uh, activities
during that period of time.
And we're particularly active in, uh,
with Maori exporters helping unlock $126 billion
worth of their asset base.
We've got a dedicated team there that focus on that
because it's a very important part
of the export, uh, economy.
Uh, just, uh, figures.
You will have had them, but I'll go over them very quickly.
Uh, the 2025 budget is, uh, $159 million.
That's, uh, down on last year.
Predominantly, that is an uplift of, uh, um, $11 million
that is, uh, spent on investment
and it will move over to invest New Zealand when
that is created past, following the, the passing
of legislation, a number of other small changes
that flow out of last year around international growth fund,
which is really recalibrating it to, to, to
what can be spent
and how we more effectively can deliver for the taxpayer
and the exporter.
Um, uh, around the International Growth Fund,
it does play a very important role,
but we've had a focus on making sure
that the money is well spent and actually it is achieving.
Uh, we want to help companies do things they might not have
done otherwise, or to do them more quickly rather than just,
you know, providing them taxpayer resource to do
what they might have done anyway.
Uh, 63 IGF expansion projects, uh,
have generated $238 million against a
$41 million investment.
Some of that funding is over a number of years, uh, uh,
127 commercial deals, uh, uh,
worth $270 million as a result of that.
And, and, uh, Pete might be able
to speak more to that, should he wish.
Uh, final two bits I wanna touch on is
around the creation of Invest New Zealand.
Uh, um, I think Damien, during the debate, sort
of ask questions about why not leave it there.
Ultimately, we want to focus on investment
and a role it can play in growing the economy.
So if you think about Sir Peter Blackman's report, uh,
where he was talking about sort of the Tech
and Science Center, he said, actually, more investment needs
to be driven into that, and therefore changes are needed.
And so, uh, invest New Zealand will work within the rules.
They don't go out and decide what it is they want to do.
They don't have any responsibility for investment policy
or the Overseas Investment Act.
They will work within those rules.
And, uh, we've been going
through a process since announcement of looking at
where they can best add value
and grow investment into parts of the economy
that will benefit New Zealanders the most.
Uh, I've had a small team of, uh, people
that have been offering advice for free, uh,
from the private sector experts that have worked in a number
of these fields with less advice, more, you know,
talking about how this might work best.
And we're moving the stage when the legislation has passed,
we'll have to have an uplift of, uh, staff
who are involved in the investment component
of New Zealand trade and Enterprise to come across so
that those investment deals that be working on continue.
And then I go through the process of pointing a, uh,
permanent board, and they'll go to A CEO so
that we can focus on, uh, you know, how
to get the most from, uh, this taxpayer investment.
Uh, the budget that they will have is, uh,
just over $21 million a year.
$11 million comes from NZTE
and industrial $10 million that comes out of the science,
innovation, and tech, uh, portfolio.
And that's so that we can focus particularly on
how we bring investment into growing
that very important part of our economy that actually flows
through to much more, uh, uh, export.
The final thing is around tariffs and the great uncertainty.
I think the committee had the foreign minister here earlier,
and you might have touched upon this,
a New Zealand trade enterprise along with, uh, the,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Trade has been working with, uh, customers, exporters
that are involved in the US market since the 10% tariff was
put and put in place both directly with them as well
as running cinema seminars
or online events to pro provide them with information
and talk to 'em about the option that they have.
Uh, nobody in New Zealand thinks tariffs are a good thing,
and so we'd be very, uh, clear in our view of this.
But in the meantime, until we can create more certainty,
either in our relationship with the US
or in export markets around the world, working closely
with companies that might be affected, uh,
particularly the small to medium sized ones, so
that they can see what their options are.
And with that, uh, colleagues, happy
to, to collect your questions.
Excellent. Thanks, ministers for Those
comments. Uh, first
Question on a Royal Damien O'Connor, look,
thank you very much and, and welcome to committee.
And, um, I, I congratulate you on the proposition.
I guess it's, it's, um, uh, one of, uh,
11% cut in expenditure to deliver highest the amount
of exports, uh, which is a kind
of a proposition most people would find challenging.
So I guess the question is, where will the double exports
come from if we are cutting back the efforts of
what is the number one yeah.
Government agency to drive that both enterprise and trade?
Well, well, I think what you've done is you have mistaken
money that government spends for more exports.
And so, you know, using that logic, we should triple
and double the budget, uh, you know,
rather than building schools
or hospitals with the hope that it would work.
What we've been doing across the board is being much
more focused on outcomes.
And so actually we've seen the work that, uh,
New Zealand Trade Enterprise has done over the last year,
increase on previous years, uh, with the same amount
or a lower amount of money.
However, having said that, you'll have seen over the period
of time you were in government, uh, money was given, uh,
to NZTE as part of the COVID fund.
It was always coming out
of the system in the early days
last year, some of that was there.
We've made some other changes,
but actually, uh, the ability for the workforce
to deliver more than they were previously,
I think is in the stats that I mentioned.
So, so can I just ask if NCT,
I guess if we have Invest New Zealand,
which is the proposition, we can go back to that after,
and, uh, the Reach provincial growth fund
or the money coming to help economic development agencies
and, and their initiatives, uh, what job does
that leave for NZTE?
Well, I, I can answer that then perhaps, uh,
because it's more of a political question,
so I wouldn't give that to Pete.
Mm-hmm. So largely, I guess, uh, it is what is in its name.
And so what we are doing is working with New Zealand Trade
and Enterprise and how we can help them help New Zealanders
export more and open up,
open up opportunities in those markets.
We are asking Invest New Zealand to, uh,
find investment from around the world that is good
for New Zealanders and good for the New Zealand economy
and to help us grow the economy
and opportunities for all New Zealanders, uh, within that.
But I mean, if you put the investment aside, uh, uh,
you know, with the funding that we have available
through the, uh, the, um, the, um, the IGF, that's, uh,
that's only part of
what New Zealand trade and Enterprise does.
To give you an example, the, um,
free trade agreements in the UK that I got
to announce was on its way.
You got to negotiate and do,
or the EU one, uh, which we started finished, and,
and then I was able to get it in force, has delivered, uh,
uh, more, you know, growth in exports during that period
of time than many other agreements.
20% increase in exports of the uk,
28% in one year for the eu.
And New Zealand trade enterprise has been doing really
important things in that market in all of them
with the resource they had, in fact, much more as a result
of better access for Kiwis.
We've asked them not to, uh, help those that are able
to achieve this by themselves,
but some of those small to medium sized companies
that might be in markets to look at other markets in the eu,
that they can have advantage as a result
of the trade agreement and more certainty
or companies that should be there
that might be exporting elsewhere.
I think about it in a really simple way,
which is NZ t's role is to look at New Zealand
exporters and to say, how can we help you
grow your export opportunities offshore
and ensure that you are maximizing our free trade agreements
that are in place and building on those, the role
of investment New Zealand will be, rather than
to face into New Zealand to face the world
and say, how can we make the most
of the international capital that is looking for a home and
provided a funnel back into investment
in the New Zealand economy?
Because we know there are people who want to invest here,
uh, but they won't always have the expertise
or knowledge to invest in individual firms or entities.
And we'll be looking for broader
vehicles by which to do that.
So one faces the world, one faces New Zealand,
both jobs are critically important,
and both jobs are critically supported by the work
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Trade who provide the enabling architecture,
which we require in order to advance investment and trade.
The legislation has gone
through the house or in the process.
Um, and so it's very hard to pick from that
or any the, um, the risk, uh, the criteria
that will govern or how, how decisions will be made around
what is high value and what is low value investment.
Yeah. So can you clarify the area?
Is it, will it be into land?
Uh, will it be into housing, uh,
commercial property or what other areas?
Yeah, specific areas of the economy will,
So, so I can help with that.
The reason that the, uh, legislation doesn't go into
that degree of detail is
because it's for current future governments
to help create direction.
Firstly. Secondly, it doesn't really matter
what the government wants investment in.
If the country's not really, investors don't wanna put money
in there, it's, it's not gonna happen.
We don't have the ability to force foreigns
to come and invest in New Zealand.
We've gotta make sure the settings are correct.
But thirdly, the legislation is very similar to that
of New Zealand Trade Enterprise was first set up,
so it's the establishment of what it should do,
it's competencies, and then we go from there.
So to answer your questions, uh, uh, I mean,
ultimately there are a number of things
that New Zealand chain enterprise have been looking at
as a result of ministerial direction, uh, previously,
you know, around investment.
And there will be priorities for the government
and we'll get to set those out and do that publicly.
But all of the areas that you are raised particularly on
property, I, IIII wanna say that I, I get that, you know,
uh, we think when we're in opposition,
if we jump on the property bandwagon, we scare Kiwis,
but ultimately invest New Zealand will work under the rules
that are in place to allow investment.
And so whatever they may be currently
in the future under a current
or future government around those issues you've raised,
they will have to meet the requirements of that legislation.
But I will give you one example.
So if you think about the tech space
and startups, we have lots
of great ideas in New Zealand companies that came from,
you know, just an idea down in Inver Cargo,
the become rocket rocket lab that all
of New Zealand should know about and be very proud of
because of the significant achievement that that,
that they have made,
particularly in bringing other investors to come into,
you know, high tech and deep tech.
There isn't enough, uh,
funding available within New Zealand.
One of the opportunities and invest New Zealand will have is
to go work with the private sector, perhaps
to set up a fund, not for them to manage.
It could be managed in the private sector
and to attract investment from banks
and others around the world.
That sole job is to focus on startups
that have a greater likelihood, perhaps,
of not succeeding without, uh, without uh, uh, um, you know,
without capital and grow those as part of the economy.
And so we'll have opportunities, um,
post third reading when the legislation's in place,
and we start establishing this committee
and elsewhere about exactly what it might achieve.
But I would say to you, they will only be
focusing on investment that's good for New Zealand
and good for New Zealanders.
And so you can still vote for it in third reading.
Damien, just very briefly, the two
Things. Do you know how much
we New Zealanders
and New Zealand invests offshore?
Most New Zealand invests offshore. Yeah, that
Is capital that we have that we vest else.
Yeah, I, I mean, I've had it,
but um, ultimately my focus is on
what investment comes to us.
And the reason for that is, um,
I'm sure one of our wonderful professionals
can do a quick Google on that.
Give us the Number, but I guess,
but I, I, I guess the point is
there are two things we could do.
We could say we don't want foreign direct investment from
anywhere around the world, and New Zealand has never
actually done that, although we've created settings
and we can say we're gonna tell New Zealanders
through the super fund everything else, what
to invest in in New Zealand.
'cause I suspect that's where this question is going.
Yes, you are right. New Zealanders should
invest in the New Zealand economy.
There have been many reasons the past have chosen not to,
but ultimately we have
to get the investment setting rights not only
for New Zealand investors as well as, um, you know, uh, uh,
investors from overseas invest in New Zealand's job.
Uh, uh, it's not a policy setting organization.
It's a found foreigners to bring investment to New Zealand.
If it's good for New Zealand, good
for New Zealanders, we should be welcoming. Yeah,
There's a, there's a simple, there's a simple kinda lineup
of facts that I look at, which is one, um, we know that one
of the factors that underlies New Zealand's lower rates
of productivity, it's not
that our workers don't work big hours
or aren't smart people.
They're all of those things,
but they have lower rates
of capital intensity in their firms.
Therefore they're reliant on less, uh, less good technology
that lines up with lower rates
of capital investment when you compare us,
us our economy to other economies.
Mm-hmm. And then that lines up
with more restrictive foreign investment settings than in
many of the countries we would like
to compare ourselves with.
It is easy to join the dots between those points
and see that if we were better at funneling international
capital into our firm's sectors
and industries, we would get higher rates
of productivity and growth.
And there is every reason for investors around the world
to want to expose themselves
to the New Zealand economy and invest in it.
But right now we make it pretty hard for them to do it.
If you're an investor who said, look, I want to get
invested in New Zealand's food production industries,
that looks pretty good.
Well, where do you start?
And so invest New Zealand is our answer to that question.
One Final, can I just question
if I can back up the comment?
I think if you look at small advanced economies, uh,
we've actually got quite low
levels of integration with the world.
So we're only 25% exports in GDP.
That's a very low number
amongst the advanced export economies.
The level of FDI, uh, is relatively low.
We have about a hundred billion dollar FDI stock.
But ask your question with one of the lowest
countries in the world for ODI overseas direct investment.
So because of our scale
and distance, we've actually got a relatively low, uh,
economic integration with the rest of the world.
And that's probably one of the things
that drives our lower productivity.
I, I've seen those figures.
I just need, the question does, does ownership matter?
Uh, well go a bit further
'cause that's fairly open question
because you know, if I think about your car,
it supported you own it, what do you mean? You've got,
I guess, the question Ownership
One Owner
To the owner business supplementary.
And then, um, thank you minister.
I just wanna come back to that original question that we,
we've sort of drifted into invest here,
but the original question was in the context of the,
of the budget this year about that, that that goal
of doubling the value of our trade exports.
And certainly when I speak
to exporters like I did last week, uh,
exporter exporting high-end audio equipment,
I visited them in Dan Kirkpatrick's electorate,
really excited by that.
They want to see that happen.
I think the question is, can you, can you outline
for us in pretty clear terms two things.
One, what is the government doing towards that goal? Yeah.
And secondly, I guess we're year in now, so
how is progress going?
Yeah, 12 months down track.
So look, a couple of things. I think it's really important
to set a target, a very ambitious goal.
And it is ambitious because it focuses the mind
of government and agencies, but also the private sector.
Uh, I'll come in a moment to some
of the things we've been doing in the first year, uh,
um, around that.
But I think what's been, uh,
most encouraging is the private sector across the board,
individual companies or sector grouping, stepping up
and talking to us about what they're doing
to help meet the ambitious goal
of doubling exports by value.
Over 10 years, I was with a, a group
of the forestry sector forest owners, uh,
last week on the side of the field days, came out
of the field days to talk to them at one
of their annual meetings.
And two of them said, this is what we are doing
to help double X export by value over 10 years.
And so it is ambitious
and I wanna recognize that, um, uh,
I think it was last year in event I was speaking at Chris
Kin mentioned that it was something that was important
and the Labor Party would join that.
So let's be ambitious, no issue with that.
So we have said there's another ways to do that.
We need better trade access, uh, no doubt at all.
Uh, you know, our FDA network, we have, uh,
around a hundred free trade agreements, uh,
investment agreements or double tax agreements
with countries of the world.
We need more of those to level
the playing field and give certainty.
And that's an and strategy we want to sell to this country
and that one and the others and so on.
You know, the, the latest one to enter into force
with the eu FDA, an extra billion dollars worth
of exports last year, that wouldn't have happened
otherwise, predominantly in the primary sector,
but not only there's a lot of tech in there as well,
and that's just money in the pockets of Kiwis.
Secondly, we said we wanna do more trade missions than, uh,
than has done before and a term of parliament,
and we remain on track for that.
I think the number we have to achieve is 21.
We are thinking more about the quality
of them than the volume of them.
But what we're also doing is measuring the deals
that are done as a result of that mission.
Some of which are just done because a minister
or prime minister is there.
Others, because, you know, they work towards them.
Uh, and, uh, Pete, I think it was about $630 million worth
of deals have been signed up
during the trade missions over the last year
and a a bit, which is quite, uh, significant.
The third thing we have to do is deal
with non tariff barriers.
And, and, um, this is, this is a very important area
because we can do every trade deal in the world
and get the tariff rate to zero everywhere.
But if the standards are such
that we can't sell into these markets,
or there is a great cost imposed upon New Zealand exporters,
then we won't get near, uh, achieving what we need to.
I'll give you, uh, two examples of this
that I think are very important.
One, which we have partially
resolved and continue to work on.
The other needs a lot of work.
Uh, the first is around we use the forestry sector.
Again, log exports to India
because the decision of New Zealand government to change,
uh, the use of methyl bromide within New Zealand,
India wouldn't accept our logs anymore.
It was some $300 million worth of trade from memory.
The reason logs go there rather than process timber,
as the tariff rate on process timber makes it prohibitive,
whereas logs is lower.
That's often the case. People want to take the logs
and add value, and the more value you add to that piece
of wood, the log, you get tariff escalation.
So it restrictions New Zealand.
There's, uh, uh, from exporting, you know,
value added product, we're able to negotiate with India, uh,
a a, a change
to their regime, something they hadn't done before.
So the logs trade can start again.
Uh, it is on a type of trial basis as we look
to have them accept other products that, that we use
to China and elsewhere, and we think we will get there,
but it's gone from almost no trade
to not quite a hundred million dollars I'm told
or forecast over a period of time of a year or so.
The second one that we need to crack,
because this is about value over volume.
So at the moment, New Zealand structural timber
manufacturers can't sell timber into Australia
because their standards are different.
They say our wood grows too quickly, it's too soft.
That's a market of some $300 million and more I advised.
And Australia has a structural timber deficit,
they must import from the world.
So I've engaged, uh, with NZ t's help and MPI and, and
and Ministry of Foreign Affairs with Australia on that,
both their agriculture
and forestry minister and trade minister.
And they're undertaking a review, another, uh,
scientific evaluation of our wood.
If we can get that right, then our sales to Australia go
through the roof of process trimbo,
and there's more reason for people
to add value in the regions
and build sawmill to, to hit there.
Yeah. So the final point of
that is Australia's either right or we, right.
We can't both because of that, right?
Our houses are falling down, which they're not.
So that non tariff barrier alone will give certainty to, uh,
an industry, uh, the far industry
that desperately needs them.
Alright, Dr. Lawrence. Nan, thank you Chair.
Uh, I have two supplementary questions on this, and,
and one of them is on,
because we're talking about investing New Zealand Zealand
before now as part of the regulatory impact segment
to the bill, the budget
that was sought in budget 2025 was $155 million.
Yeah. Budget 2025 is $84.6 million. Mm-hmm.
That is at the reduction of 45%. It's not just 10%.
Like what they on Con was mentioning.
What, how are you intending on achieving the outcome
or purpose of investment in New Zealand, considering that
what they're asking for and
what they received a substantially much less?
Well, um, uh, speaking as the Minister of Economic growth,
uh, every initiative that goes
through the budget process has
to be negotiated with the Minister of Finance.
And, uh, the experience that we have with her, uh, is
that she's very demanding about can you demonstrate value
for money and impact for the dollars
that you are asking for?
Because every dollar has multiple purposes.
The first purpose that we should always have is a sacrosanct
purpose is that it could do a lot
of good within a New Zealand household,
particularly New Zealanders, who are suffering
with a very high cost of living.
Uh, and so we need to ask ourselves,
are we getting the best impact when
it comes to invest New Zealand?
Yes. Um, there was always the potential
to make this bigger from day one.
Instead, the approach that we've taken as a government is
to say, let's fund it to establish itself, to demonstrate
that it is able to achieve the things we wish it to achieve
and to get impact for those dollars.
Once that's up and running,
we can then consider further business
cases for expanding it.
I think this is a prudent balance
of making sure we are getting impact
before we put, send too many dollars
chasing after the objective.
So we'd be expecting some tangible performance measures,
which currently doesn't exist in budget. 2025
Documents. Yes, absolutely.
Because that will of course be one
of the first jobs of the incoming board
to set those performance measures so
that we can hold them accountable.
Okay. Second question.
In terms of the export growth, um, minister you mentioned
before in terms of the fact that we're signing up
to new free trade agreements as well
as comprehensive economic partnership agreements.
Um, what is the proportion then,
currently we're trending in terms of our proportion
of export, sorry,
our export in proportion to GDP,
Uh, export is a proportion of GDP, uh,
I know from the primary sector,
which is about growing to 13%.
Can someone help me with that please?
It's about 25% exports to GDP, um,
and it's been between, between 25%
and 30% over the last 15 years.
So it's a, it's gone up and down a little bit,
but proportionately, uh, across success of governments,
the size of the export sector relative
to the total economy hasn't changed
Much. And more recently,
we've had a bumper time
for goods exports, some of the highest, um,
numbers on a volume and value basis, uh, on record.
Um, some of the best proportions there.
Uh, and you will have seen in the Primary Industries report
released at field days last week.
Yeah. Uh, that we are now predicting bumper, uh, volumes
and values across a range of agricultural sectors.
So the, the trends are looking good. It'll
Be good for us to get a trend
because the question then is if we are signing up
to more FTEs and CPAs,
but then we're actually seeing that it's stabilizing,
it's always gonna be roughly the same.
What's the point for us to spend all of this money with
and the t to actually sign?
Yeah. Well, well, well, it's, it's rarely something
that New Zealand has done since the United Kingdom joined.
What was then the common market has looked to diversify.
It's not for the government necessarily to, uh, uh, say
to exporters where they should go.
Although with New Zealand trained and enterprise, we support
and we direct where there are opportunities, uh, um,
exporters have to decide upon risk for themselves.
And they do that very, very well for a range
of a range of reasons.
So the reason that we have
and want more trade agreements is not necessarily
because trade will increase,
although it does, uh, you know, uh,
because it may not increase as a percentage of DDP
because, you know, the, the,
the country's economy grows in many areas
other than just export.
But the reason we want this
as a trade agreement does nothing more than gives rights
and obligations and sets very clear rules for business
to be able to rely upon, uh, uh, with Australia.
Uh, we have absolute certainty if you want to export
to Australia how you'll be treated
and what your rights are in that market and vice versa.
And so ultimately we continue to negotiate trade deals
that are of high quality to bring costs down
through tariff rates, but to give certainty to exporters so
that they can diversify.
And I think, you know, across the board,
not just the primary sector, we've done that very well.
The final point I wanted to make
around this is we do talk about goods exports a lot
because we are one of the most efficient food
and fiber producers in the world, the highest quality
and safest on the back of our farmers
and forests and fishers.
Uh, but that's only part of the equation
where the real opportunity now into the future is, uh, is
around, uh, that of both services and innovation.
So if you, uh, uh, a young New Zealander that chooses
to study and have a career in a tech space,
you will earn more, um, by
magnitudes than other parts of the economy.
And the return on investment will be it challenging on
investment in tech and technology is quite significant.
And I'm gonna use agriculture as an example again.
You know, we, I used to sell, still do sell a lot
of apples to, uh, America.
A year or two ago, we made more money
through exports selling, uh, machines designed
and manufactured New Zealand that process
and package apples
to America than the apples we did with themselves.
And so we have opportunities
to go up the value chain here in addition to the food
and fiber we produce.
And so one of the things we're very keen
for invest New Zealand to do along with New Zealand trade
and enterprise, is drive more investment in parts
of the economy that we're not doing as well as we could.
That there may well be bigger risk for a New Zealand
investor, but appetite from a foreigner
that can create something that doesn't exist.
Yeah, I mean there's, there's two ways of looking at it.
One, diversification is our best, uh,
protection against risk.
Mm-hmm. And the world has illustrated in pretty vivid terms
recently how quickly trade, uh, access can change.
But the second thing is,
is different horses for different courses.
So a different exporter will want
to access a different market depending on which service
or product that they're trying to reach customers with.
And so broadening the options means
that more exporters can succeed.
I've been given a figure for you, Damien.
Um, as of March 25, the total stock of New Zealand, uh,
overseas direct investment,
total foreign assets owned offshore is 43 billion,
Sorry, 43 billion.
Oh, I had a figure of about 373 billion.
So there's clearly some assets on the foreign assets.
So 4,386 billion, sorry.
And 4 4 438.
Why don't we, I guess speak to it?
Can I, can I just, I don't, I I don't want to labor,
but what we sort, what we are told, and,
and it's part of the whole Invest New Zealand, uh,
legislation, is that we don't have sufficient capital.
And, and, and so there's often a accusations
of not enough capital going into high technology
or not, not enough research and development going into it.
And so these are not necessarily decisions of government.
Correct. And so what I'm trying to get to,
and it comes around to the question of
we need 7% growth year on year to double exports.
Yep. We are cutting back in our efforts from government
agencies and we're relying on foreign investment to drive
that growth and with the beneficiaries of
good commodity prices at the moment.
So we are trying to, I'm trying to ask, is it realistic
to have your aspirational goal, which
of course we would like, um,
with the current settings or as you propose? Well,
Look, I think yes, it is realistic
and it should be ambitious.
And that's why I'm glad so many companies are joining
as well as, I mean, your leader,
although you know, it, uh, it will take a lot
of hard work, but gotta be really careful.
We don't confuse the amount we spend
as a government with achievement.
And so ultimately, uh, we are seeing from New Zealand trade
and enterprise greater delivery
through more focus with less money.
And we've redirected that into other areas of the economy
that are important, including health
and education, things to get inflation down.
So interest rates come down, which is good for every house,
but particularly also good
for companies that want to export.
It makes them, uh, uh, more competitive internationally.
And so ultimately, if we take invest New Zealand, uh, uh,
uh, as an example, I am more than comfortable
with the amount of money that we have on an annual
basis to do that job.
And if we can demonstrate we can do more, we should do
that in a normal budget process.
But quite mindful that if we had the amount that was advised
to us, you know, you may end up with an agency
that's running around just employing people.
I actually want them meeting people overseas
and bringing investment into the country that will achieve
what you are saying, right?
You know, uh, uh, uh, to,
to grow the economy. And it's not foreign
Direct investment Versus
Domestic investment. We
actually have an opportunity to have both.
Can I make a comment there? I mean, I think
as a chief executive in the public service, I'm expected
to get more for less
and as, which is just called productivity.
So just the fact that you get more money does not mean
that you shouldn't produce, uh, a bigger output.
And, you know, the opportunities
of artificial intelligence there are absolutely huge.
Not only that, I think I've always thought, uh, that better
collaboration and coordination across the government
agencies is a huge opportunity
for greater impact without spending more money.
If you had a look at the field days this year, I mean, led
by the ministry of primary industries, a lot of other mfa,
US export credit office, all packed into the,
to the primary sector, all working together to, to help
with the pri uh, primary sector so that,
that ability to collaborate.
And I think probably the third thing is that the role
of doubling exports doesn't just sit
with the international facing agencies.
You need education, innovation, uh,
competitive business settings, uh, infrastructure build.
And that's really what you are relying on the rest
of the government strategy to lift,
uh, capacity in the economy.
So you can in fact sell that capacity offshore.
Uh, so I think it's not, I don't feel from where I'm sitting
that having a bit less money is, uh,
resulting in less output. On the contrary.
So I just had a supplementary on the comment you'd made
earlier around, um, the tech side and,
and look leads into some
of those comments about field days as well.
Last week I think we had a fantastic week at field days in
the Waco Day, best part of the country, of course,
but the outcome of that was, I think a high level
of optimism in the primary sector.
Alright, we're on track now
for 60 billion in export earnings.
That's a record. That's great.
Great announcement around wall and kaga
or homes, all of those things
that are benefiting the rural sector,
which is fantastic to see.
Um, we've had the tech sector in here as well as part
of an ongoing piece of work we're doing
around the impact of non Ontario areas.
Uh, that's an area
that's evolving rapidly growing over time,
and I think presents a massive opportunity for us.
Um, they are concerned
that they're not necessarily seeing the support
or have the mechanisms to enable them to grow.
So I'm interested in, in your message to, uh,
those in the tech sector that are looking to innovate
or grow and expand offshore.
Yeah. Well the first thing that I'm always at pains
to point out is that it's not ag versus tech.
Actually ag is the original tech in New Zealand.
That's where the number eight wire, uh,
description comes from.
And if you look at a number of the technical, um,
innovations that have occurred in businesses
that have arisen, they've started an ag you know,
Gallaghers is the, is the case study of that.
It started with electric fencing
and is now providing security systems at the highest
end internationally.
And so from which we are experts in other things can grow.
And so I'm always at pains to,
to say it's not one versus the other.
In terms of the tech sector more broadly, this is a sector
where New Zealand I think has particular opportunity over
the next little while when it comes
to service exports in particular.
So the sector that I highlight
for you is the financial services sector,
which is a 23% growth year on year.
Now why is that?
Because actually, if you're a smart person with a good idea,
you can build an app on a phone
and we now provide you access
to the data in which you can do that.
And there's nothing to stop you from coming up
with a world-leading innovation
or export right here from here in New Zealand.
What could stop you is if there aren't trading arrangements,
which would allow you to sell that product offshore.
And so that's why the work that te
and do to open those doors is critically important.
Um, the other thing that constraints can constrain tech
businesses is that critical question of access to capital.
Uh, which is that if you're a venture entity that is looking
to expand your operation,
you're not always gonna get the cash
from the commercial bank.
They're simply gonna say,
this is too high risk a venture, we're not that interested.
So you're gonna look for capital elsewhere if you are lucky.
Uh, and, and New Zealand KiwiSaver Fund might invest, um,
maybe the Elevate Fund, which the government invests in, uh,
will invest in a fund of funds which invests in you.
You might get there. But the more capital we can bring in
to those funds which are interested in exposing themselves
to higher risk, uh, venture enterprises,
the more opportunity there is for those tech firms
to access the capital they need to grow
to build the next manufacturing plant
to access the next market to hire the next she of workers
that they need to, to take their, um, idea
to the the world stage.
Can I, um, thank you for that.
Um, the international, uh, growth fund, um, is is one
of the, uh, entities, uh, uh, tools I guess,
and it's demand driven.
So we see the, the number
of applications going from two 50 down to 200, um,
which saves the budget,
but also is an indication possibly
that there are fewer firms looking to export?
Or is maybe, is there an explanation
that you have in that space?
Well, I, I'll pass to Pete,
but we've also had a little look at the criteria
and engagement and involvement, uh,
and what's needed from those companies
that may get the funding.
So we've, you know, refocused that a little bit,
not significantly to make sure that where the funding goes
as is much more likely
to deliver the results the tax value would expect, uh,
through through exports.
But Pete, maybe I'll pass through.
Yeah, absolutely. We have, uh, lifted the entry criteria
and the standard, uh, of the applications.
Uh, the fund was $60 million during the COVID period
and there was definitely an emphasis on, uh,
not being too stingy as we dispatched that fund
because it was a lot of very, very wounded,
uh, companies around.
So, and we, so we took that advice.
Uh, now there's been a big tightening up,
a big focus on additionality, uh, for the fund.
Is it making, uh, the company go, uh, bigger, uh,
or better or faster?
What's, what's the value add, uh,
for the New Zealand tax payer and what's the additionality?
So we've definitely lifted the, the standard of the fund,
which is a consequence of the fund getting smaller and,
and, you know, wanting to dispatch it more tightly.
So is that it's harder effectively for them to get access
to the assistance or
No? Um,
think of, think of it this way.
A a a company can't spend money twice
and neither can a government, although we can take more tax.
And so we're just looking to apply some of the disciplines
that the private sector would be doing themselves as
to when they decide to spend money
and where, I mean,
we should always go and have a look at these things.
If we take the extra funding put in during COVID, then,
you know, perhaps there's a very good reason for that.
But we're well past that now.
You know, really, uh, you know, uh, uh, uh,
with the assistance of the Minister of Finance focused on,
you know, if I use this,
what else can we not use the money for?
And so, uh, we will deliver the outcomes we need
for exporters the company that we work with, with the funds
that we have available.
Uh, and uh, where there is a good idea,
there is enough money to support.
And we've also, uh, tightened the eligibility criteria
going from 50 50 to 60 40, uh, private
to public investment.
And the maximum, uh, size
of company has dropped from 500 million to 100 million.
Uh, focusing the fund really on the question of scaling
companies in the middle of the triangle, uh,
the big companies, uh, you we're very careful
how much funds you put up in that area.
'cause it then becomes a subsidy, um,
and down, right down at the very, very bottom.
You be careful how much you put in there
because, you know, to,
to grow a tiny company a lot doesn't add add
a huge amount to the economy.
So we really, everything pushes you into the middle of
that export triangle, helping those companies scale,
which we think is the core dilemma in the export economy.
Laura McClure. Okay. My, um, thank you Mr. Chair.
My question was actually a,
aside from Damien's one previously around, um,
you were talking about the opportunities with tech, um,
and potential investment coming in the likes of ai.
Do you have concerns around New Zealand's infrastructure
when it comes to the likes of ai?
I mean, we would be able to power this, um, potential
growth, and I know it's not directly in your portfolio,
but do you see potentially investment in some kind, um,
infrastructure coming in from Yeah, well look,
You know, if you look through economic history,
there is a really strong correlation between countries
that can access abundant and affordable energy
and countries whose economies grow fast.
And the key, uh, infrastructure required to support AI
and digitization more generally is data centers,
which are extremely energy intensive.
So I see the core challenge as New Zealand's ability
to supply the amount of affordable renewable energy required
to power up the industries of the future.
This is a very competitive landscape internationally.
When firms are choosing where to locate
and where to build a data center, one
of the things they're asking themselves is,
can I rely on the electricity supply?
Is it renewable? Is it affordable? Is it abundant?
Um, and forgive me the political point, uh,
but it's one that I feel very strongly.
I think one of the worst decisions made
by the previous government was the decision
to ban the exploration for offshore oil and gas
because that has had a demonstrable impact on
our electricity system.
Yeah. And that we haven't been able to provide the surety
of supply needed.
You've seen as a consequence, some industries have
to peer back what they're doing.
You've seen electricity bills rise.
Of course, we need to keep investing in solar and wind.
We've got a backbone of hydro,
but into the future we will need gas supply in order
to provide confidence of surety
of supply and the abundance of it.
So when was the last time energy strategy
is critical to that?
When was the last time you found?
Well, unfortunately, Damien, when the message you send
to the world is don't come here
because we, there's massive sovereign risk
and we'll shut you down at any minute,
people aren't really prepared
to invest in the exploration to begin with.
So that's a challenge that we are facing into.
There were policies in this budget, uh,
announced to address that.
But the broader point is providing affordable,
abundant electricity supply is gonna be critical
to our ability to make the most of AR
and other digitization technologies.
We are Bit, but, uh, Dan, back to, yeah, I just wanted,
mine's not to, that, that's a new question.
Can I, um, to supplement you on that one
because you raised I wanna ask my,
we're topic just to short up.
We, we are, I mean, we, we are part
of international agreements, uh,
agreement on climate change, trade and sustainability
and our commitment with other countries to try
and encourage the world
to reduce subsidies on hydrocarbon.
And there are currently, I think it's a trillion dollars
or so, it's a massive amount currently
subsidizing the industry across the globe.
Will this in fact run counter to that minister
and will you run into trouble trying to, uh, advocate for
the reduction of fossil fuel subsidies?
Well, that's not directly the responsibility
or any responsibility of NZT,
but with the chair's permission, I'm happy to answer it.
As trade, as trade administrator, yeah.
Very succinct answer would be great. Go.
So the answer is everything the government has done is
within, fits within our trade agreements.
So, and, and you know, we take them very seriously.
But I would say,
and something that's important across governments, as we,
uh, enter into agreements with others in a range
of agreements, we should always reserve the right
to make decisions about how we achieve those within there.
And that's something that I continued to, uh, you know,
affirm with countries around the world.
I was in EU two weeks ago
or last week, uh, uh, uh, when I met with a number
of commissioners, they made the case
and talked a lot about, uh, uh, that we are committed
to our obligations across the board about as they, uh,
decide how to meet them, we will as well.
And so I am extreme, I'm more than comfortable
with the decisions the government's made
that they fit within all of our trade agreements,
including acts, which actually focuses on these things.
Thank you. Just one kind My note that
We'll just focus back on.
Sorry, I, I note that, um,
we have talked mainly about investing z which is
of course part of this, um, ion, I just don't want
to talk about trade just briefly, uh,
because there's been a huge amount of focus going into trade
and I'm just, um, noting in the, in the,
what we've seen the focus on countries in the Indu
Pacific and Southeast Asia.
Um, but uh, firstly, could you elaborate on the reasons
for this and secondly where the focus is
for the next 18 months?
Well, the Tyra near distance has always made it
challenging for New Zealand as an export nation.
Uh, you know, when the United Kingdom joined the common
market, uh, you know, given the,
the significant distance it had started
to have a real impact upon exports and
therefore, you know, the earnings of New Zealanders.
But for the first time, uh, we now sit close to one
of the most exciting and fastest growing, uh,
economic regions in that southeast Asia.
And so we have, uh, trade agreements in place, uh, with, uh,
a number of agreements with the majority of those countries,
or all of which are high quality.
And so the government has a focus on
how we can maximize return on behalf of the taxpayer
for the resource that we've put in
to grow opportunity and grow exports.
Exports are as simple as this.
Exports are jobs and money in the pocket of New Zealanders.
That's right. There's nothing magic about it.
The more we sell, the higher value we sell,
the richer New Zealanders are,
the better the jobs that they have.
And it's just as fundamental as that.
And so we have asked, uh, New Zealand trade enterprise along
with other government agencies to look at
how they can apply greater focus to these markets
that have greater growth potential
and continue to
identify companies that want to do well there.
Okay.
Yeah. So just a supplementary question for that.
Do have a question around key, um, just something
that you mentioned before, minister in terms of
that overseas, uh,
particularly when you look at data centers are looking for
reliable and renewable energy sources.
Mm. Can I just check what do you mean?
How is oil and gas renewable?
Well, in the absence of gas
for when the sun doesn't shine, the rain hasn't fallen
and the wind's not blowing,
you can't provide a secure energy supply.
Mm-hmm. So New Zealand is distinguished from most countries
around the world and that a significant proportion
of our energy production is already renewable.
Mm-hmm. The question is how we make sure
that we provide confidence
of supply even when our renewables aren't operating.
And so gas at the margin allows you to do that.
So while we can build out more renewable capacity,
we need a backbone of affirming generation from gas
to allow ourselves to be renewable elsewhere.
Uh, and this is something that I'm very happy
to provide you links to the number
of energy experts written about this
and who have written about
how ludicrous the 100% renewable
objective of the last government was.
Okay. We'll keep the questions to the appropriations now.
Thanks. Thank you. Um, but
that was something the minister brought up,
but just checking terms of NZT, what sort of support,
and we've probably mentioned this previously in terms of,
uh, annual reviews,
but in terms of this year's budget, what sort
of support is NZT providing for communities?
And particularly we're looking at migrant communities,
Chinese and Indian communities who are here,
but provide that really key conduit between
domestic businesses here and overseas, businesses elsewhere,
how are they being supported by NCT?
Because what I'm hearing from communities is that,
that they are not.
Mm-hmm. Well, um, so New Zealand trade
and enterprise is, you know, an agency focus on helping
companies based in New Zealand export more
to create links and contacts.
So irrespective of, uh, the origin of the nationality,
of the ownership of the company, if it's in New Zealand,
if they fit within the criteria,
then we're able to help them.
Uh, there are about a thousand target companies
that they focus on
because we can't help every company when it comes to export.
So we have a thousand and they work through that thousand
of those who graduate and therefore don't need it.
There's much help or help anymore.
So we can find another company to come in
or those that may fall below
'cause they're not achieving what they need to.
Broadly wider than that.
There are many other companies that give advice
and they work to, but,
but there, you know, I mean, if I understand your question,
if there's New Zealand company wants
to export a market we're involved in, then uh, New Zealand
and Trade Enterprise is available to them.
If they're not exporting, if they're importing,
it's not a role and responsibility that they have.
No, I meant exporting,
but then, you know, Asians in the latest census make up
about 20% of New Zealand population.
So there are Asian business owners
and exporters from here going elsewhere, and they're
Just as eligible for NZTE support as any other group.
So when, uh, when we went a number
of trade missions last year, there were a range
of New Zealanders or different backgrounds
that came along from Asia and from Australia
and people here now as well as others originally.
And so, so I mean, I dunno if there's anything more you want
to add, but, um, if there's an export company
that needs help and we can deliver that
and it fits in the criteria, they, they are offered help.
So On the, no, sorry, on the,
obviously the target we've got, right, we're looking
to double the value of exports.
We've got a strong focus on growing trade with India
and back of commenced TRA
negotiations on a free trade agreement.
We've just heard about a bit of that under
the MFA briefing before this.
Uh, really interested in the work that NZTE is doing,
specifically helping New Zealanders engage more into the
Indian market and what the opportunity is there. Yeah,
Say we've got, um, good trial.
I mean you raised the same question the last, uh, committee
and it was a good prompt.
Uh, we've got good strong relationships
with the Indian Business Council,
with the Latin American Business Council, with the Pacific,
uh, business Council, uh, and at the last, um,
And a range of others as well.
Sorry, my question was on uh,
New Zealand businesses into India specifically.
Yeah, I was just, just ask, I just,
my question we've dealt with that.
Thanks. Okay. No, that, I'm sorry Chi,
but I was trying to answer my question.
So, so just, just around that.
So it's big opportunity in India,
1.4 billion people, uh, growing wealth.
They are looking towards the rest of the world
to, to trade more.
It's a very challenging market
for anything you might do there,
including trade negotiations.
So, you know, that we launch earlier in the year, uh, um,
and, and remain committed.
As I've been questioned, Damien previously remain committed
to deliver a quality deal for New Zealand
during this term of parliament.
But actually, uh, you know, it would be good
for all New Zealanders
and give us many opportunities to, to do more.
New Zealand trade enterprises is engaged there.
I think, uh, Pete from memory,
we announced an additional
person, resource person going in there.
We continue to look at our network around the world.
You know, we don't want to pull out from any market
because we're only there when there is interest from
New Zealand exporters.
But we need to find ways to be more efficient in what we do
to free up funds to put people in the areas that we need.
And so, you know, no decisions are made yet,
but ultimately, uh, I would like
to see a greater emphasis over time in our footprint in
India, uh, with a trade deal.
Opportunities will be significant,
even without a trade deal.
Opportunities with India will be significant
and that's part of that and strategy.
Thank you. Can I look, look, just, just
to clarify my figures and,
and it was a, a question, uh, not a rhetorical one
'cause I was seeking clarification.
So the total investment offshore from New Zealand is
$373 billion.
So just to put that in the equation of, of, of capital,
because I know it is a significant issue
for our productivity and I know the NZT has always played a
part in that, but I guess the question of what
that additional capital will do when it comes into our
country, will it inflate?
And so the question is will it be allowed to,
to be invested in land, farmland and houses?
Sure. Or what particular areas do you think we will get the
greatest boost to our economy from that investment? Mm-hmm.
So if the first thing to understand is
that the Overseas Investment Act will still set the
parameters, uh,
in which invest New Zealand needs to operate.
So that's the first piece in terms
of national interest protections and security.
So, so, so It is the case now under the rules
that your previous government administered
that there can be investment in
farmland in a number of cases
For Forestry, for example, where
There's proven additional advantage.
Correct? Correct. And so those are the current settings.
And as the law stands, that is the law
that the investment investment
New Zealand will need to operate within.
When the government introduces changes
to the Overseas Investment Act, which it will do shortly,
um, that will be the law that applies in terms of
where do we think investment will make a
difference across the economy.
For me, the simple test is, uh, will
that investment help create New Zealand jobs,
grow New Zealand incomes,
and drive more, uh,
economic activity in New Zealand communities.
And so there are a range of areas
where that could be the case.
Could it be increasing the, um, footprint
of a manufacturing facility?
Would it be investing in the technological solutions
that are required to make a firm more productive?
Is it that there is a small startup
who desperately want the funds so
that they can grow their global presence?
There are any number of, uh, purposes
to which a New Zealand based entity could use capital in
order to expand what they're doing, hire
or kiwis pay their own workers more,
create bigger profits, be more productive.
Tic can I, uh, because I'm just trying to find a list here
of the ex extension
and expansion of the list of skills
where we'll rely on migrant labor
to come in and fill those gaps.
So in fact, we're creating jobs within New Zealand
for migrant labor to come in
because we can't fill 'em ourselves.
So my question is, can we be assured
that we can line up the skills
matrix from within New Zealand,
or will we just rely on migrant workers to come
and fill the jobs so that we will create?
Well, it's um, of course the primary goal is
to create jobs for New Zealanders.
Sometimes, however, there are critical skill gaps
that if we don't meet those skill gaps,
then actually New Zealand jobs will go by the wayside.
And the example I think of is, you know, if you get the, um,
dairy farm who cannot for the love of God, get a milker, uh,
and that that would mean that
that entire dairy farm's operation is at risk in the jobs
that depend on it.
You know, the other classic example
that I came across the other day at a manufacturing facility
was then wanting to get someone
who was an expert in carbon fiber, uh, engineering.
And their view was if we get someone in with that set
of skills, then they can train the next set of apprentices
who we need coming through from New Zealand
to fill those jobs in the future.
So sometimes, uh, skills of the effort,
skill transfer purposes, um,
but the primary goal is
to create New Zealand jobs and incomes.
Excellent. Right. That brings us
to an end of today's session.
Really, really appreciate your time ministers
and the work you're doing in this
area on behalf of New Zealand.
Thank you so much.